Let's now look at some out of ordinary
situations when utilising polymorphism to cast
in core methods.
In the last few videos, I discussed casting
a primitive data type in reference variables.
In this video, I want to explore casting
specifically for arrays and generics.
I haven't discussed generics in the course yet
and that's because they're not officially part
of the first certification exam,
but you may bump into them in some
of the example code on the exam,
so I'm gonna review them ever so briefly
in the context of casting.
So, we need to create a new class in our
Polymorphism project.
And we're going to call it Cast Extras.
(mouse clicking)
(keyboard clanking)
Alright, so you can see there we got a class cast extras.
We've got two nested, static class is Base Class,
as well as Next Class,
and Next Class extends to Base Class.
Then moving down to our main method,
you can see there firstly I'm creating the uh,
most generic of arrays, and that's an array
of type 'object'.
So, moving on down from there,
within filling an Object Array, with objects
that are of type Next Class,
noting that it doesn't change the type of array
to Next Class when I do that.
I've been setting one of the elements in the array
to a String Builder object because
I want to wreck some havoc.
And then we're printing out at the bottom
the array type, as well as the array elements.
So, let's run this code.
(mouse clicking)
And you can see down in the bottom there,
our array is still an array of object,
but our elements are Next Class objects,
with the exception of one of them
and I'll scroll over and check that one out.
And that was the String Builder at Index Five,
and that's printing out 'test' there.
Alright, so what is the cost of creating
an array at the most generic type there is?
Object, in other words.
Accessing elements in an Object Array will require
a cast, more than likely anytime you want to get
an element to do something with it.
Alright, so let's paste some more code in here.
(mouse clicking)
(keyboard clanking)
Alrighty, so there's our code.
So, we got a loop through our array,
we gonna cast each object first to type 'Next Class'
to print the name attribute on Next Class.
And then we gotta cast to Base Class
to print the name attribute on the Base Class.
So, you can see we're using a uh,
a four loop there, in doing what I mentioned.
We've also got Try Catch there,
and we're obviously wanting to catch something
if an exception is raised,
so let's actually run the code.
(mouse clicking)
You can see obviously the code compiled,
but we gotta runtime exception when we try
to cast the String Builder to a Next Class.
The Try Catch code caught that,
and you can see we got our Class Cast Exception,
"The String Builder cannot be cast to class,
Cast Extras Next Class."
So, here you can see that putting everything
in an object array makes more work for the consumer,
in terms of casting and is a little dangerous
because objects of unknown types might
be allowed to populate the array.
Alright, so I'm gonna add some more code,
(mouse clicking)
just down at the bottom of the main method again.
Okay, in this code,
it's creating an array of Base Class with six elements,
unpopulating three of them with Next Class instances,
and three of them with Base Class instances.
We're then going on down to print
out the array elements,
and to loop through them using the ternary operator
in conjunction with the instance of operator
to determine what kind of object we really have,
and what we're dealing with.
So, lets run the code.
(mouse clicking)
So, error part from this code segment
we pasted is showing,
demonstrating that the first three elements are
Next Class types and the following three
are Base Class.
And we're printing the name field on each and
if we hadn't cast the Next Class objects to Next Class,
case would've been the name for all six elements.
Alright...
Alright, so let's test casting the entire array
a little bit and just see what happens by pasting
some extra code
So, gonna do it at the bottom of the main method.
(keyboard clanking)
So, you can see what I've tried to do here,
and the Compiler has let us get away with it so far,
and it's feasible that the mixed Array could be
populated with objects of its subtype only,
but do you see,
once we got a run at the Java Virtual Machine
won't allow me to do this.
Let's run it.
(mouse clicking)
So, the code compiled but executing it caused
an issue.
And so as you can see,
we've got a Class Cast Exception when
we ran that block of code.
Alright so, let's just comment that code out,
(mouse clicking)
(keyboard clanking)
and let's try something else.
I'm going to paste some more code in.
(keyboard clanking)
So I can see that I'm using a Arrays.fill
to fill it with just Next Class objects.
I'm using a cast there,
and setting the next Array to reference to mixed Array.
So let's see what happens.
(mouse clicking)
But as you can see,
we got the same error when we ran it.
So, you can't downcast an array to find with
a parent type to it's child's type,
you won't get a Compiler error,
but you will get a runtime exception.
Alright, so I'm just going to comment out the code.
(keyboard clanking)
Alright, so I'm going to end the video here.
In the next one,
we're going to start working on some examples
of casting with and without generics.
See you in the next video.